# [Mark Galeotti, Downfall: Prigozhin, Putin, and the new fight for the future of Russia](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Downfall-Prigozhin-Putin-Future-Russia/dp/B0CPM9LS3K) *as in 2024*

- [Евгений Пригожин](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yevgeny_Prigozhin)
- *"...our feeling was that he represented an archetype of the Putin regime, whom we could use to explore some of our respective interests."*
- *"...The Soviet police, the militsia, were not always the most efficient, but they were methodical."*
- *"...Still, in the 1960s, it was perfectly possible to feed a family of three on one and a half rubles a day. Staples including bread, grain, cheese and milk were cheap, while poultry and beef, and even vegetables such as tomatoes and cucumbers, were readily available. Subsidised housing, however cramped, meant that you had a guaranteed roof over your head, and it was exceedingly difficult to get fired from your job....This was blat, the economy of favours, and integral to Soviet life as the centrally planned economy continued to fail to deliver the plenty that successive Communist Party leaders had promised."*
- *"...The problem was that he was surrounded by criminals who enjoyed a standard of living he felt he never could achieve just by playing the game. ‘There was a highly visible class of the elite, which consisted of children of high-ranking Party bosses, diplomats, department store directors, or any significant post in the food supply chain,’ a Russian entrepreneur of Prigozhin’s generation would recall. ‘That elite class had everything, and doctor families did not. Those people flaunted their wealth. They dressed better. They had cars, clothes. But corruption was widespread, and you couldn’t get a cushy job like that without first embezzling and then bribing your way to the top.’"*
- *"...Yet even if you were willing, you still had to know the right people. Soviet society was not only riven by economic inequalities, there were also divisions of class and caste that, perversely, worked against the intelligentsia. Members of the Soviet intelligentsia imposed a certain moral and intellectual code on themselves and especially on their children. This was the irony of Soviet socialism: it created new class divisions and snobberies at least as rigid and oppressive as the bourgeois societies it affected to despise.....especially at a time when there were quotas limiting how many students of Jewish heritage (his father came from a Jewish family) would be accepted....Nonetheless, Soviet authorities had a great deal of say where people got to live and work, and this was especially true of a convicted felon.
- *"...The teenager had an impulsivity and what one of his gangmates would call an ‘inner cruelty’ that supercharged his ambition. He fled back to Leningrad where, if he had already been labelled a thief, he was determined to be a good one. On 6 October 1981, he was sentenced to 13 years in a high-security correctional labour colony."*
- *"...One didn’t listen to the ponderous speeches of the Communist Party’s general secretaries if one could avoid it. With their repetitive, obsessive citations of Leninist doctrine, their obligatory quotations from past Party congresses, and their dogmatic proclamations of the obvious filled with meaningless factoids, they were not just tedious, they seemed to have little connection with the realities of Soviet life."*
- [перестройка](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perestroika) - [гласность](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glasnost) - [Михаил Горбачёв](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mikhail_Gorbachev)
- *"..**It was unheard of – you couldn’t simply complain about standards of living like that.....‘For the first time, the Soviet leader talked like a simple normal person.’ The very word that Mikhail Gorbachev used in passing, perestroika, literally rebuilding, might be a staple of any normal, elected Western politician promising structural change, but in the Soviet context, where difficult things were just not said openly, and where challenging dogma was so existentially dangerous, it was revolutionary. Gorbachev was just beginning his own journey, which would start with his believing that the system was fundamentally redeemable, just needing some housekeeping and modernisation, and end with him all but turning against the Party and ultimately signing the Soviet Union out of existence. In the process, the economy would effectively collapse and the ‘fraternal bonds’ holding this multi-ethnic empire together fray and break. At first, though, this was a time of excitement and growing optimism.**."*
- *"..**Gorbachev would preach glasnost, loosely translated as ‘speaking up’: a more honest reappraisal of the country’s blood-soaked past and its dysfunctional present. In time, this would spin out of control as there were just too many skeletons in the Party’s closet for this to be manageable. In the early days, though, it promised a new era, one in which people were citizens and not subjects. Previously banned books appeared on the shelves, and people who had once derided Soviet newspapers as little more than badly printed toilet paper lined up to read them in their thousands, such that copies had to be displayed on stands in the streets since they sold out so quickly. Gorbachev also hoped to tap public enthusiasm to reform the moribund economy. Just as glasnost encouraged civic agency, perestroika would see efforts to harness entrepreneurialism. Through small businesses called kooperativy, cooperatives, the idea was that people would find that hard work and enterprise would be rewarded – legally. For many, it was, but reform would increasingly expose fundamental contradictions in the system. How could private business and the planned economy truly coexist? How could a Party that had presided over industrial-scale murder and repression claim legitimacy? How could a reform programme promising to work within Soviet rule of law cope when the logic of those reforms undermined or dismantled that very system of legality? Gorbachev came to power hoping to preserve the system through reform; instead, he destroyed it. The optimism of the early years would give way to anger and misery. The cooperative movement was largely strangled by bureaucratic obstructionism and predatory officials. Party conservatives increasingly openly conspired against Gorbachev, and would eventually even launch an abortive coup against him in August 1991. The economy lurched into crisis: by the later 1980s, sausages, grain and butter were being rationed in most of the country......Nonetheless, the public energy and enthusiasm Gorbachev had unleashed would not disappear. Instead, people turned to new causes, from anti-Soviet nationalism to religion, from get-rich-quick schemes to an emerging ecological movement.**."*
- *"...the Zone, the Soviet penal camp system. Old hands in the criminal subculture of the vorovskoi mir, the ‘thieves’ world’, would claim that their real life was that lived inside the Zone. Rather than the prisons of the West, the Soviets – and the Russians after them – largely sent their criminals to penal colonies. There, living in crowded barracks blocks, the inmates largely kept their own code exalting thuggish machismo and made their own rules, exploiting and abusing those who broke them out of ignorance or defiance."*
- *"...He had not been a hard childhood, at least not by Soviet standards, and it certainly was not the case that he had lacked the chance for a normal, decent life. Yet there always seems to have been a tension between his ambitions and his opportunities – until he found himself in the Zone."*
- *"...**The 1980s had transformed the Soviet Union, empowered a new generation and brought free enterprise out of the black market and into the open. The old unspoken rules of Soviet society – Не верь, не бойся, не проси (do not trust, do not fear, do not ask) – were seemingly banished.**."*
- *"...Prigozhin was a man already prepared for the coming decade. The end of the Soviet Union ushered in a time of troubles, in which a handful would become vastly rich while most went hungry, in which organised and disorganised crime alike would prey on the emerging capitalist market, and in which the old rules no longer applied while the new ones were yet to be made. Mercedes-Benz would sell more bulletproof limousines in 1990s Russia than in the rest of the world put together and if in Soviet times everyone had spare rubles because there was nothing in the shops to buy, now everything was available, but no one had any money. Ambition, enterprise, cunning and a willingness to use violence and threats would be essential to prospering in this brave new world, and Zhenya had them all."*
- *"...**In 1990, as the Soviet Union was opening up, many of the creature comforts that Westerners took for granted were coveted as exotic luxuries by people accustomed to deficits, and who saw them more on screen than in real life. Hamburgers, denim jeans, bananas – these simple things were in such high demand that people queued up for miles for McDonald’s, and street-corner rubbish bins were buried deep in banana peels. All this pent-up, unmet demand offered enormous business opportunities for anyone with the hustle and entrepreneurship to make and move product......The ruble, which the state had for so long artificially pegged at parity to the dollar, was beginning its long, painful slide towards its real market value.....This may have sounded like easy money, and for the Western free-market economists watching from afar and the young, liberal intellectuals advising Gorbachev, all this emerging capitalism was indeed beautiful to behold. But that was as long as you were far enough away from Aprashka not to hear the gunshots. Like most retail hubs in Soviet cities, and Moscow and Leningrad in particular, these open markets were fast becoming centres of criminality. While making money may have been easy, keeping it (and your life) was anything but.**."*
- [блат](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blat_(favors))
- *"....**There was officially no capitalism in the Soviet Union then, but in practice everyone also played the black market: you had to, to survive. There certainly was an economy, trading something you have for something that you want, from goods to favours....liberal, pro-Western intellectuals who were aware that the Soviet economy simply wasn’t working because there were fundamental contradictions between the rigid ideology that the government sought to enforce through its laws and the way commerce actually worked on the ground. This was, after all, a time when блат – meaning pull, or favours – was as much a currency as those overvalued rubles.**."*
- *"....**However, the moment when it became possible to talk openly about all these things outside of one’s kitchen, when a new Party leadership under Mikhail Gorbachev was sparking hope of reform, of actually building something in which it was worth believing, that was when the young man (Putin) was sent off to serve in Dresden, East Germany, one of the backwaters of the Warsaw Pact. While it had better beer than back home, he missed out entirely on the optimism, change and hope that his country experienced in those brief five years....After returning from Dresden in 1990, watching an empire he had sworn to protect crumble, 38-year-old Vladimir Putin left the KGB.**."*
- *"...**But virtually overnight, the elite he had joined had been stripped of any status, any meaning. No wonder corruption became ubiquitous: in the absence of values, what other motivation was there but money?....order. But now there is no central idea in Russia. However bad the idea that Russia used to have, it was still there. Now, there is nothing. What is it that we are trying to attain? Personal profit? But then where are the boundaries?’**."*
- *"....One had or could make the money; the other could offer access and security. Both ended up empowering each other, but at the cost of enabling and perpetuating the lawlessness that had pushed them into each other’s arms in the first place."*
- *"....Russian folklore is filled with such tales of a lowly serf rising to serve the tsar. While these fairy tales usually have happy endings, as Herzen’s account suggests, the real ones were fraught with tragedy and danger: it is rare that social climbers ever feel at home among the elites, who will eternally regard them as suspect outsiders, even as they take advantage of them.......‘Vladimir Putin saw how I turned a kiosk into a business,’ he would boast years later, long before the resentment started to set in that would overflow and lead to his downfall. ‘He saw how I do not hesitate personally to bring a plate to crowned heads, because they came to visit me. And I tried my best.’"*
- *"....Старая таможня in particular were vulnerable not just to racketeers demanding protection money, but to this far more mundane, and far more ubiquitous, semi-legal racket. It took a particular skill to distinguish those whom one could afford to brush off from those who needed to be paid off, lest they cause real damage. The best response to such predators was to have a strong, high krysha, or ‘roof’ – in other words, protection. And the best krysha in 1990s St Petersburg was City Hall."*
- *"....[Семь-сорок (7:40)](https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0105351/) (7/40, also the name of a popular 1992 comedy film about Soviet immigrants heading to the United States)..."*
- *"....**making something more expensive than it needed to be was part of a widespread and depressingly effective business strategy. As one joke went, a New Russian shows off his new watch to a friend. ‘How much did you pay for it?’ the friend asks. ‘Two hundred bucks, why?’ ‘You fool – they’re selling them for $500 just around the corner.’**"*
- *"....**There has been much confusion about the nature of Russian political corruption, confounding foreign policymakers and businessmen, who often assume it works just like corruption in Western democracies. In the environment that was quickly taking hold after the collapse of the Soviet Union – where Soviet rule of law had been obliterated and a new system had not yet been built – it was not that money could buy you power so much as that power got you money. Even the oil tycoon Mikhail Khodorkovsky, Russia’s richest man who nonetheless went to jail for trying to challenge the system, knew that you accrued and held your wealth at the pleasure of the tsar because, ultimately, he was the one who held the final monopoly on the use of force.**."*
- *"....**the unspoken rules of the game, the [понятия](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thief_in_law)**..."*
- *"....**formed a [тусовка](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/%D1%82%D1%83%D1%81%D0%BE%D0%B2%D0%BA%D0%B0#Russian) – the slang of the day for a tight clique of like-minded people – of politicians, security officials and simply friends who would go on to make up the core of Vladimir Putin’s government**."*
- *"....**It is impossible to overstate the degree to which power became personalised under Putin. When he became president at the end of 1999, he began to appoint his friends and former colleagues to key positions throughout the system, putting a premium on loyalty above competence......There was the future stand-in president, Dmitry Medvedev, back then a liberal, who was another of Sobchak’s former students.**."*
- [Игорь Сечин...His nickname is Darth Vader.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Igor_Sechin)
- *"....**Nonetheless, Prigozhin could rightly claim to have played a role as midwife to the emergence of a new elite.... Elites evolve over time, though, and as Prigozhin leveraged his entrepreneurial acumen and political connections to move into ever-more serious business, he seems not to have realised that he was no longer everyone’s favourite facilitator but a player in his own right – and players need allies and acquire enemies.**."*
- *"....**Russian businesses tend to take Putin very seriously: a year after his visit in 2009, for instance, the Pikalyovo Cement Factory was still keeping on display the chair on which Putin had sat, emblazoned with his name tag. There is good reason for this: long after the lawless 1990s, these ostensibly private businesses still very often owed their sustenance, their funding and their protection not so much to the government, but to the patronage of specific people within it – and most of the time to Vladimir Putin personally.**."*
- *"....**This was very much part of the process of the creation of a new elite. The original oligarchs had been creatures of the 1990s, the Yeltsin era: bankers and businessmen who accumulated fantastic wealth, largely through the rigged privatisation campaigns that saw the assets of the Soviet state sold off for kopeks on the ruble, and often to those who already had the money, muscle or connections to keep their rivals at bay. This relative handful of men were as politically powerful as they were obscenely rich. It was largely thanks to them that Boris Yeltsin beat off a renewed challenge from the Communists in the far-from-honest 1996 presidential elections, and many of them were supportive of the decision to elevate the little-known Vladimir Putin as his successor in 1999, thinking he would be a biddable instrument of their will. Of course, they were wrong. Even before his election, when asked in a radio interview how he felt about the oligarchs, he said that if one meant those who fused power and money, well, ‘there will be no oligarchs of this kind as a class’**."*
- *"....**In July 2000, he summoned 21 senior business leaders to a meeting in the Kremlin where he promised not to look too deeply into where people’s wealth had come from, so long as they henceforth stayed out of politics. He offered to ‘make our relationship civilised and transparent’, but arguably it was rather more transparent than civilised. Two of the most politically active oligarchs, media tycoons Vladimir Gusinsky and Boris Berezovsky, were forced out of the country, but the most striking example of this ‘transparency’ was the treatment meted out to Mikhail Khodorkovsky, Russia’s richest man. He continued to bankroll opposition politicians and speak out against corruption and so, in 2003, security officers stormed his private jet during a refuelling stop in Novosibirsk and arrested him at gunpoint. His oil empire, Yukos, was broken up and largely handed to Igor Sechin, Putin’s former assistant in St Petersburg, and Khodorkovsky himself was sentenced to nine years in a penal colony on fraud and tax-evasion charges.....The other oligarchs chose to accept their new status: they were no longer masters of the (Russian) universe so much as Putin’s managers, allowed to retain their fortunes and business empires so long as they knew their place.**."*
- *"....**Prigozhin was no oligarch....And yet, the prime minister himself had brought a delegation of officials to the opening of his factory. This was not just a favour for an old St Petersburg contact, it reflected the way that this new elite was being formed: the real backbone of the Putin system was and still is made up not by the handful of billionaires comfortable in the president’s favour, but the mere multi-millionaires, the ‘minigarchs’ who have done very well but know that – unlike Putin’s handful of genuine friends – they cannot just rely on the tsar’s goodwill. As one consultant who worked with them in the mid-2010s put it, ‘they need to keep proving that they are loyal and useful, and they are all competing against each other so they can never just sit back and enjoy life’.6 Prigozhin would become one of these rich but insecure minigarchs, able to leverage his Kremlin connection to turn restaurants into a massive catering business and more, but always conscious that what the tsar gave, he could always take away.**."*
- *"....**It was precisely the blend of Russian tradition and European standards that Putin wanted to symbolise his emerging nation, and if Zhenya had managed to impress the foreign president, then he had certainly managed to impress his own....To truly grow in Russia those days, one needed not just the permission of the government but its enthusiastic support. Prigozhin had to convince Putin that their interests were one and the same.**."*
- *"....**In 2008, Vladimir Putin decided to respect the term limits imposed by the Constitution, and stepped down from the presidency. It was a tough decision: popular support was robust enough, and his parliament by that point was sufficiently docile that he could have easily passed the necessary amendments extending the limit beyond two four-year terms. Indeed, he would do just that over a decade later. But at the time, Putin may have been contemplating stepping back from politics and in any case was keen to court Western business, with Russia an eager contender to join the very same World Trade Organization on which the president had written his undergraduate thesis.**."*
- [Russia’s Accession to the WTO](https://www.everycrsreport.com/reports/RL31979.html)
- *"....**But Putin was in no position actually to trust the democratic process and rule of law – who knew what would happen to him, his friends, his wealth and, yes, the country if Russia were suddenly to succumb to the kind of parliamentary chaos – full of fistfights and scandals – that defined the legislative process just across the border in Ukraine? So instead of ceding power entirely, he stepped down to the office of prime minister, promoting his friend from the St Petersburg days, Dmitry Medvedev, to be his proxy president. The liberal lawyer, who had a fondness for British classic rock and innovative technology – who, indeed, was one of the first Russian officials to get himself a Twitter account – easily won the presidency in 2008.....With Putin carefully watching over his shoulder, Medvedev launched a liberalisation campaign intended to modernise Russia and foster better economic and political ties with the West. At the same time, though, Putin was keenly aware of the need to balance this new pivot with the more statist and nationalist elements within the government elites. By choosing Medvedev, after all, he had passed over the hardline defence minister, Sergei Ivanov, disappointing not just him, but the security community that backed him. Moreover, there were growing financial troubles at home: Russia was hit hard by the financial crisis of 2008, poorly managed Soviet-era factories were on the verge of bankruptcy, and there was the risk of mass unemployment and, with that, plummeting approval ratings.**."*
- [Great Recession in Russia, 2008](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Recession_in_Russia) - [Russia after the Global Financial Crisis](https://www.brookings.edu/articles/russia-after-the-global-financial-crisis/) *"....**But the Russian economy was hit hard. The world financial crisis and the bursting of the asset bubble presented Russia with a double shock. Oil prices collapsed, which had a huge direct impact. And capital was withdrawn from Russia in the flight to safety. Both of these shocks were primarily due to events abroad. It is important to stress this point, because some observers have argued that Russia’s crisis is home grown. It is not. Russia’s structures and policies have determined how the shock played out in Russia, but the shock itself was external.**."*
- *"....**The Soviet Union’s social safety net had been shabby and dysfunctional, but at least it had existed. In Russia, thanks to the shock-therapy reforms of the 1990s, it all but collapsed. The Yeltsin government often had barely enough money to function, hence the bargain-basement sale of Soviet companies that created the new class of oligarchs, and while the free-market ideologues of the time believed that private business would invest in infrastructure, even in the oil boom of the 2000s, that clearly wasn’t about to happen. Yet what Yeltsin’s administration could get away with, a government swimming in oil revenues could not.**."*
- *"....**This helped cauterise one particular potential obstacle to Prigozhin’s being considered respectable in Putin’s Russia: it was not so much that people were expected not to have dealt with gangsters in the 1990s – near enough everyone did – it was rather than you had to appear to have moved on.**."*
- *"....**Putin may have liked his service at Staraya Tamozhnya, but you couldn’t really ask Zhenya Prigozhin to build schools and hospitals across an impoverished region (as the oligarch Roman Abramovich did in Arctic Chukotka) or facilitate connections to foreign government (as banker Piotr Aven was requested to do when Donald Trump won the US presidency). Nor was he one of Putin’s real friends: Zhenya did not holiday with Vova, the way Defence Minister Shoigu did, nor did he attend the president’s personal ‘Night League’ ice-hockey games the way crony-oligarchs such as the Rotenberg brothers so often did. Although Putin was friendly enough when they met, this was always in the context of official events, and often with the overtones of sly malice with which Putin habitually keeps his underlings in their place.....**."*
- [Роман Абрамович](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roman_Abramovich) - [Roman Abramovich's Chukotka project](https://www.opendemocracy.net/en/chukotka_3904jsp/)
- *"....**Even when Prigozhin tried to assert for himself the perquisites of the oligarchs and aristocrats of Putin’s circle, he faced pushback. Most Russians, for example, particularly resented the way the rich and powerful seemed to feel that traffic rules were for the little people, fitting flashing blue emergency lights on to their cars to claim priority. This even led to the rise of a civil society movement, the ‘Society of Blue Buckets’, who fixed blue children’s buckets on to their car roofs during rolling protests. As a result, by 2011, there was something of a crackdown, but figures such as Sechin continued to get away with their use. Ignoring the rules became a way of trying performatively to demonstrate one’s importance.**."*
- *"...as late as 2018, it emerged that his catering services were responsible for a range of sicknesses in Moscow’s schools and kindergartens, and, in 2019, the court ordered Concord to pay compensation to the parents of children who had suffered from dysentery as a result. Likewise, in 2022 alone, the Defence Ministry would open 560 lawsuits lawsuits against the Concord group for allegedly supplying the army with poor-quality, rotten and infected food."*
- [‘Putin’s Chef’ Compensates Victims of Caterer’s Mass Poisoning in Moscow](https://www.themoscowtimes.com/2019/04/26/putins-chef-compensates-victims-caterers-mass-poisoning-moscow-a65401)
- *"...**26 February 2012....That day, more than 30,000 Muscovites took part in a political flashmob....What was special about it wasn’t just the snow, the white ribbons and roses brandished by the participants, but the hope that, together, they could stand up for free and fair elections in Russia, for honesty, for integrity.**"*
- [2011–2013 Russian protests / Snow Revolution (Снежная революция)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2011%E2%80%932013_Russian_protests)
- *"...**2012. It was a time when the Kremlin abandoned liberalisation and turned to rely on those who saw their fortunes in peddling patriotism in return for Kremlin favour. It was a time of disappointment, betrayal and revenge – on the part of various sectors of society, on the part of Putin, and on the part of Prigozhin himself, who found his voice amid this new, thuggish populism. In his first two presidential terms, 2000–8, Vladimir Putin had been all things to all Russians. His first deputy chief of staff, Vladislav Surkov, who had trained to be a theatre director, was the architect of Putin’s ‘managed democracy’, granting him all the performative perks of a democracy without any of its constraints.**."*
- *"...**Likewise, Putin’s early years offered something to every stratum of society, from the elite’s new opportunities for embezzlement to steady improvements in the standard of living of blue-collar Russians. Throughout Medvedev’s regency, Putin likely intended to remain in a powerful role simply to protect himself, his family and his assets. After all, in a system like this, where the law always takes second place to political power, to abandon high office is to become potentially vulnerable. However, the question of what exactly this would mean, whether a return to the presidency or a move to some honorific ‘father of the nation’ role remained open until around the summer of 2011. Ultimately, Putin convinced himself that he was indispensable.....It also reflected Medvedev’s more emollient foreign policy, as he pursued a ‘reset’ with the West, and at one point even publicly disagreed with Putin over NATO policy towards Libya. This broke a central element of their pact, that Putin would continue to shape foreign and security policy.**."*
- *"...**But the bigger problem was that Medvedev’s liberalisation campaign started to acquire a little too much momentum for Putin’s comfort and, more to the point, for many of his cronies and confidants, who began whispering in his ear about the need for him to retake power. Medvedev was inadvertently exposing deep fissures in Russia’s economy and political system. Although largely superficial, his anti-corruption campaign and drive to reform the economy further began to create a demand for real change, and liberals in the government started taking his messages rather too literally. Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance Alexei Kudrin was becoming increasingly outspoken, at some instances openly clashing with the president over fiscal policies. A liberal wing began emerging within United Russia, even while Putin was still the party’s leader. Most of all, Russia’s growing middle class, which had come to enjoy growing standards of living thanks to more than a decade of high oil prices and relative political stability, started exhibiting signs of a healthy sense of entitlement. Having the economic means, they now started to expect political representation.**."*
- *"...**When Putin announced that he would be returning to the presidency, it triggered a shock and disappointment so powerful that it impelled the liberals into action. ‘It felt like we were duped and betrayed for believing Medvedev,’ said a retired official who had worked in the government IT sector, close to the reformist technocrats. ‘I felt personally humiliated.’ Taking the parliamentary elections as a rallying point, these middle-class, metropolitan liberals began holding increasingly large protests demanding free and fair elections.**."*
- *"...**Elections in December 2011 saw United Russia predictably win a majority of seats, but even though the level of vote rigging was probably no worse than in the past, it galvanised the liberal opposition, which began holding large rallies, especially in Moscow, protesting the results and demanding a free and fair presidential vote. The emerging leader of this movement was a Western-educated blogger and anti-corruption activist, Alexei Navalny. A charismatic, even if at times also nationalist voice, he declared war against ‘the party of crooks and thieves’ – Putin’s United Russia and his corrupt cronies. Largely unspoken at this stage was the degree to which this was also becoming something of a class war, reflecting a widening divide between the educated middle class and not just the elite, but also the blue-collar majority, and those whose livelihood meant depending on government money.**."*
- *"...**It launched a propaganda campaign painting the protesters, and Navalny in particular, as part of a Western-sponsored plot to destabilise Russia. Most importantly, in what would become a cornerstone of his policies for years to come, Putin found a convenient scapegoat in US secretary of state Hillary Clinton, who had criticised the parliamentary elections for voting irregularities. ‘She set the tone for certain activists inside our country, sent a signal, and they heard the signal,’ Putin said in December 2011. ‘And with the support of the State Department, they began to act … [Western governments] felt they had leverage inside our country.’**."*
- *"...Бюджетники - those working directly or indirectly for the state"*
- *"...If the best and most productive part had betrayed Putin, it was time to build a new base.....[Наши](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nashi_(youth_movement)) for example, was something like a cross between the Soviet Komsomol (Young Communist League) and the YMCA.."*
- *"...**In what was a cynical caricature of the reality, the Kremlin ruthlessly spun this as class war: an entitled and unpatriotic creative class pitted against the honest and upright children of disenfranchised factory workers from the rust belt. For many of the latter, politicised pro-Kremlin youth organisations were among the only career ladders to which they had access.**."*
- [Internet Research Agency (Агентство интернет-исследований)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_Research_Agency)
- *"...**Prigozhin may have started building his PR machine to defend himself and his business empire, but he soon came to realise that narratives, opinion and spin were going to be valuable new commodities in the (dis)information age....2011 was the year when it became ‘strategically important to sow doubt about opposition journalists who were rocking the boat’. However, especially in those early days, Prigozhin was neither tasked by the government nor even being directly paid for these smears. Instead, he and his social media specialists seem genuinely to have believed that what they were doing was right, as Navalny and the opposition were ‘seriously trying to destroy our country’, in Zubarev’s words. Even Mikhailov, not someone with any reason to cover for Prigozhin after what happened to him in that wood, concurred: ‘This is the idea of Yevgeny Viktorovich Prigozhin himself … I read that this is an order from the Kremlin, “homework” that Prigozhin performed in exchange for billions in government contracts. Based on what I saw and heard, I’m certain that he did not receive “instructions” from anyone, did not consult with anyone and did not ask permission.’.....He gambled that his attacks on the liberals would be rewarded, and increasingly this did indeed pay off.**."*
- *"...**However, already Prigozhin’s role as trollmaster had become an international story, as he stood accused of tilting the balance in one of the most seismic global events of the decade: the US presidential elections of 2016.**."*
- [Russian interference in the 2016 United States elections](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Russian_interference_in_the_2016_United_States_elections) - [Russia's Prigozhin admits links to what U.S. says was election-meddling troll farm](https://www.reuters.com/world/europe/russias-prigozhin-admits-links-what-us-says-was-election-meddling-troll-farm-2023-02-14/)
- *"...**In February 2018, as America still struggled to come to grips with Donald Trump’s election in 2016, Special Counsel Robert Mueller indicted 13 Russians working for the Internet Research Agency who had allegedly tried to influence the presidential election. At the heart of the influence campaign were 3,500 Facebook ads placed by the IRA focusing on race, policing, immigration and other divisive issues....As other, separate Russian influence operations emerged, including a hack of the Democratic National Convention servers by groups tied to Russian intelligence, panic spread in the United States about a coordinated campaign from Moscow to destroy its political system.**."*
- *"...**The idea that Prigozhin’s trolls were specifically charged with garnering support for Trump – popular in an American media horrified at the time that half the country could elect such a president and eager to find a scapegoat – doesn’t really stand up to evidence. Most of the troll factory’s content had little to do with backing a specific candidate or side. One IRA-created community staged a Black Lives Matter flashmob, simply for the sake of testing out whether social media commentators in St Petersburg could get people to a rally in Charleston, and others exploited existing scandals associated with Trump. The content was much more about exploiting hot-button issues in the United States – the same toxic, populist narratives that have long been the staple of demagogues. It was no wonder that they often aligned with Trump’s narratives but according to one employee at the troll factory, this was ‘correlation’, and not support. ‘There was no objective to “support Trump.” All current problems [that were being criticised] were directly related to the actions of the ruling party at that time [the Democrats]. Hillary [Clinton] is their representative, which means she is to blame,’ according to another employee. Indeed, Clinton figured in the troll posts far more often than Trump did.**."*
- *"...**the Russian leadership was convinced she would win, and that she would bend all America’s resources to toppling Putin. To a considerable degree, this was mirror-imaging: they thought US democracy was as ‘managed’ as Russia’s. As a Foreign Ministry staffer confidently told us a few months before, ‘the American establishment will not allow a Trump to be elected’. The aim seems to have been to support any and all divisive causes and actors across the political spectrum (indeed, at one point they managed to spark simultaneous pro- and anti-Trump demonstrations in New York), not just to make Clinton squirm, but to try to ensure that her presidency would be so consumed with domestic crises that it lacked the opportunity to look towards Moscow.**."
- *"...**‘There was no massive campaign,’ another Russian government official told us. ‘Disparate activities of this or that activist, or special services group, or businessmen and entrepreneurs – these people are always active in fields like this. It’s what they do. It doesn’t mean that they are part of some grandiose plan to instigate regime change in the United States...We have a lot of strange people, in Moscow and abroad, who call themselves agents of the Kremlin. They are trying to earn money or political capital that way.'.... What were Prigozhin’s true motivations in unleashing a dark PR campaign that would, inadvertently, assume such global significance? Was he indeed tasked by the Kremlin, even though his operatives, and he himself, scrambled to deny it? Or was he one of those ‘strange people’, doing this out of patriotism, or to guarantee the millions of dollars in government contracts that were coming his way? It is impossible to know for sure: Prigozhin largely avoided interviews at the time and would only admit to founding the Internet Research Agency – proudly at that – after Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine in 2022. But given what we do know, it was likely a combination of all of these things.**."*
- *".....First came Turist (The Tourist, 2021), following heroic Russian mercenaries – Wagner is not mentioned by name – in the Central African Republic, defending locals against villainous rebels backed by France and the USA. ‘Americans say they fight for democracy,’ one of the mercenaries pointedly says, but ‘Russians fight for justice.’ In many ways, it would be harder to find a better encapsulation of Putin’s own view..."*
- *"...**Was Prigozhin really trying to distance himself from the whole presidential election scandal? Of course not, quite the opposite: he wanted it both ways, to make his jabs at the Americans for their supposed Russophobic paranoias, while continuing to keep himself associated with this alleged success. He may actually have had no or very limited role in Trump’s victory, but so long as his enemies were willing to ascribe him with such Mephistophelian powers, he was happy to take fullest advantage of this.**."*
- *"...**There is no official order, decree or record for the creation of the Wagner Private Military Company (PMC). As of writing, the very existence of private military companies in Russia is still illegal. Under Article 359 of the Criminal Code, mercenary work remains punishable by seven years in prison, while recruiting, training and financing mercenaries can land a Russian citizen in jail for 15 years. So how was it, exactly, that a restaurateur, a businessman close to the president himself, wound up doing just that? And why?...By his account, he made his decision in spring 2014, when Russia jumped on the last train and managed to block the arrival of the Ukrainian army into Crimea. I, like many other businessmen … tried to recruit a group to go and protect Russians. I flew to an old training ground and did it all myself: cleaned old weapons, sorted out [kit], and found specialists. On 1 May 2014, a group of patriots was born, which later acquired the name Wagner. And now the time of revelation has come. These guys, the heroes who defended the Syrian people, other peoples of the Arab countries, destitute Africans and Latin Americans, have become one of the pillars of our Motherland....Prigozhin’s claim to having been driven by patriotism is not exactly untrue, merely not the whole truth.**."*
- [Группа Вагнера](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wagner_Group)
- *"...**had spoken at the St Petersburg Economic Forum about the kind of things that excited the Kremlin and the General Staff: how the military can build ties with the private sector and how the projection of power could be privatised....But 2010 was not the time to ruffle anyone’s feathers. Russia was quickly recovering its economic standing after the 2008 financial crisis, and was re-establishing relationships with the West and, with that, its global influence. Rather, it was in 2012 that everything changed, and the Kremlin began considering another important advantage of PMCs: their deniability.**."*
-  *"...**In 2012, the first such PMC was established, the Slavonic Corps.....The Slavonic Corps had been a failure – and Utkin had been part of this debacle – but the Kremlin still thought that a tame PMC could be a useful deniable instrument of power projection, whether in the Middle East or Africa.**."*
-  [Славянский Корпус](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slavonic_Corps)
-  *"...**Everything changed with the Ukrainian ‘Revolution of Dignity’ in the winter of 2013–14....At the time, the Kremlin had no specific and coherent goals and strategy towards the Donbas.....Prigozhin was chosen by the Kremlin because he was both ‘a man of initiative’ who ‘knows how to get what he wants’, as well as close enough to Putin to be considered reliable, but not so close as to be too powerful, and too obviously a Kremlin proxy. The interesting thing is that, according to these sources, he was apparently initially reluctant, with one person involved in the original discussions recalling that ‘it immediately seemed to me that Prigozhin didn’t like this whole idea with PMCs at all’.....What seems likely is that all the stories are true, in their own ways. The Kremlin wanted someone to set up a new PMC for deployment in the Donbas, and chose Prigozhin. Genuinely fired up by the muscular nationalism of the moment, but also well aware that he was not in a position to deny the Kremlin, Prigozhin ultimately opted to volunteer himself before he was volunteered.**."*
-  *"...**in the period leading up to Wagner’s genesis...all to create a private army to ‘defend Donbas’.**."*
-  *"...‘adhocracy’ (where real power lies largely not in the formal structures but instead in personal relationships, and where individuals and institutions are often charged by the sovereign with responsibilities on an ad hoc basis), whatever role people think they may be playing is constrained by and often clashes with their real role..."*
-  *"...**The curators behind this new mercenary experiment seemed to have learned lessons from the Slavonic Corps debacle. This new force was properly trained and armed – unlike its predecessor.....Wagner’s role was less overt and more violent. Among its missions was, apparently, taking out those separatist warlords who had become inconvenient for the Kremlin.....Having demonstrated its value in the Donbas, from 2015 Wagner was being actively supported and guided – ‘curated’ in the Russian jargon – by the GRU.**."*
-  [GRU](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GRU_(Russian_Federation))
-  *"...**The Crimean annexation had led to Western sanctions, redoubled when pro-Russian fighters in the Donbas used a Russian-supplied missile to shoot down a Malaysian passenger airplane, MH17, thinking it a Ukrainian warplane. Meanwhile, Moscow felt that its international standing was under threat. In September 2015, Vladimir Putin agreed to help Syria’s Bashar Assad put down a popular rebellion that had escalated into a full-blown civil war. The United States had long been providing some rebels training and equipment, and so this was a demonstration that Russia was prepared to fight proxy wars against the United States if necessary. The Kremlin asserted that it could rely on airpower alone and not deploy ground troops. At least, not officially......Wagner was deployed to provide that muscle, a force that was deniable not so much to the West as to the Russian people......As one US military observer later put it, ‘had Wagner not helped stop the Syrian lines crumbling, arguably all the airpower in the world wouldn’t have saved Damascus’.......Prigozhin got upset. 'It was us, not you, that took Palmyra!’**."*
-  [Wagner Group activities in Syria](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wagner_Group_activities_in_Syria)
